Version 0.58.0 (20 September 2023)
----------------------------------

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2

This is a major Numba release. Numba now uses towncrier to create the release
notes, so please find a summary of all noteworthy items below.

Highlights
~~~~~~~~~~

Added towncrier
"""""""""""""""

This PR adds towncrier as a GitHub workflow for checking release notes.
From this PR onwards every PR made in Numba will require a appropriate
release note associated with it. The reviewer may decide to skip adding
release notes in smaller PRs with minimal impact by addition of a
``skip_release_notes`` label to the PR.

(`PR-#8792 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8792>`__)

The minimum supported NumPy version is 1.22.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Following NEP-0029, the minimum supported NumPy version is now 1.22.

(`PR-#9093 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9093>`__)

Add support for NumPy 1.25
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Extend Numba to support new and changed features released in NumPy 1.25.

(`PR-#9011 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9011>`__)

Remove NVVM 3.4 and CTK 11.0 / 11.1 support
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support for CUDA toolkits < 11.2 is removed.

(`PR-#9040 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9040>`__)

Removal of Windows 32-bit Support
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This release onwards, Numba has discontinued support for Windows 32-bit
operating systems.

(`PR-#9083 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9083>`__)

The minimum llvmlite version is now 0.41.0.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The minimum required version of llvmlite is now version 0.41.0.

(`PR-#8916 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8916>`__)

Added RVSDG-frontend
""""""""""""""""""""

This PR is a preliminary work on adding a RVSDG-frontend for processing
bytecode. RVSDG (Regionalized Value-State Dependence Graph) allows us to
have a dataflow-centric view instead of a traditional SSA-CFG view. This
allows us to simplify the compiler in the future.

(`PR-#9012 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9012>`__)

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``numba.experimental.jitclass`` gains support for ``__*matmul__`` methods.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

``numba.experimental.jitclass`` now has support for the following methods:

* ``__matmul__``
* ``__imatmul__``
* ``__rmatmul__``

(`PR-#8892 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8892>`__)

``numba.experimental.jitclass`` gains support for reflected "dunder" methods.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

``numba.experimental.jitclass`` now has support for the following methods:

* ``__radd__``
* ``__rand_``
* ``__rfloordiv__``
* ``__rlshift__``
* ``__ror_``
* ``__rmod_``
* ``__rmul_``
* ``__rpow_``
* ``__rrshift_``
* ``__rsub_``
* ``__rtruediv_``
* ``__rxor_``

(`PR-#8906 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8906>`__)


Add support for value ``max`` to ``NUMBA_OPT``.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The optimisation level that Numba applies when compiling can be set through the
environment variable ``NUMBA_OPT``. This has historically been a value between
0 and 3 (inclusive). Support for the value ``max`` has now been added, this is a
Numba-specific optimisation level which indicates that the user would like Numba
to try running the most optimisation possible, potentially trading a longer
compilation time for better run-time performance. In practice, use of the ``max``
level of optimisation may or may not benefit the run-time or compile-time
performance of user code, but it has been added to present an easy to access
option for users to try if they so wish.

(`PR-#9094 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9094>`__)


Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Updates to ``numba.core.pythonapi``.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support for Python C-API functions ``PyBytes_AsString`` and
``PyBytes_AsStringAndSize`` is added to ``numba.core.pythonapi.PythonAPI`` as
``bytes_as_string`` and ``bytes_as_string_and_size`` methods respectively.

(`PR-#8462 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8462>`__)

Support for ``isinstance`` is now non-experimental.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support for the ``isinstance`` built-in function has moved from being considered
an experimental feature to a fully supported feature.

(`PR-#8911 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8911>`__)


NumPy Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All modes are supported in ``numpy.correlate`` and ``numpy.convolve``.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

All values for the ``mode`` argument to ``numpy.correlate`` and
``numpy.convolve`` are now supported.

(`PR-#7543 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7543>`__)

``@vectorize`` accommodates arguments implementing ``__array_ufunc__``.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Universal functions (``ufunc``\ s) created with ``numba.vectorize`` will now
respect arguments implementing ``__array_ufunc__`` (NEP-13) to allow pre- and
post-processing of arguments and return values when the ufunc is called from the
interpreter.

(`PR-#8995 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8995>`__)


Added support for ``np.geomspace`` function.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This PR improves on `#4074 <https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/4074>`__ by
adding support for ``np.geomspace``. The current implementation only supports
scalar ``start`` and ``stop`` parameters.

(`PR-#9068 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9068>`__)

Added support for ``np.vsplit``, ``np.hsplit``, ``np.dsplit``.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

This PR improves on `#4074 <https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/4074>`__ by adding support for ``np.vsplit``, ``np.hsplit``, ``and np.dsplit``.

(`PR-#9082 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9082>`__)

Added support for ``np.row_stack`` function.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for ``numpy.row_stack``.

(`PR-#9085 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9085>`__)

Added support for functions ``np.polynomial.polyutils.trimseq``, as well as functions ``polyadd``, ``polysub``, ``polymul`` from ``np.polynomial.polynomial``.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for ``np.polynomial.polyutils.trimseq``, ``np.polynomial.polynomial.polyadd``, ``np.polynomial.polynomial.polysub``, ``np.polynomial.polynomial.polymul``.

(`PR-#9087 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9087>`__)

Added support for ``np.diagflat`` function.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for ``numpy.diagflat``.

(`PR-#9113 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9113>`__)

Added support for ``np.resize`` function.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for ``numpy.resize``.

(`PR-#9118 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9118>`__)

Add np.trim_zeros
"""""""""""""""""

Support for ``np.trim_zeros()`` is added.

(`PR-#9074 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9074>`__)


CUDA Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bitwise operation ``ufunc`` support for the CUDA target.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for some ``ufunc``\ s associated with bitwise operation on the
CUDA target. Namely:

* ``numpy.bitwise_and``
* ``numpy.bitwise_or``
* ``numpy.bitwise_not``
* ``numpy.bitwise_xor``
* ``numpy.invert``
* ``numpy.left_shift``
* ``numpy.right_shift``

(`PR-#8974 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8974>`__)

Add support for the latest CUDA driver codes.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for the latest set of CUDA driver codes.

(`PR-#8988 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8988>`__)


Add NumPy comparison ufunc in CUDA
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
this PR adds support for comparison ufuncs for the CUDA target
(eg. ``numpy.greater``, ``numpy.greater_equal``, ``numpy.less_equal``, etc.).

(`PR-#9007 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9007>`__)

Report absolute path of ``libcuda.so`` on Linux
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

``numba -s`` now reports the absolute path to ``libcuda.so`` on Linux, to aid
troubleshooting driver issues, particularly on WSL2 where a Linux driver can
incorrectly be installed in the environment.

(`PR-#9034 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9034>`__)

Add debuginfo support to ``nvdisasm`` output.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Support is added for debuginfo (source line and inlining information) in
functions that make calls through ``nvdisasm``. For example the CUDA dispatcher
``.inspect_sass`` method output is now augmented with this information.

(`PR-#9035 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9035>`__)


Add CUDA SASS CFG Support
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

This PR adds support for getting the SASS CFG in dot language format.
It adds an ``inspect_sass_cfg()`` method to CUDADispatcher and the ``-cfg``
flag to the nvdisasm command line tool.

(`PR-#9051 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9051>`__)

Support NVRTC using the ctypes binding
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

NVRTC can now be used when the ctypes binding is in use, enabling float16, and
linking CUDA C / C++ sources without needing the NVIDIA CUDA Python bindings.

(`PR-#9086 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9086>`__)

Fix CUDA atomics tests with toolkit 12.2
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

CUDA 12.2 generates slightly different PTX for some atomics, so the relevant
tests are updated to look for the correct instructions when 12.2 is used.

(`PR-#9088 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9088>`__)


Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~

Handling of different sized unsigned integer indexes are fixed in ``numba.typed.List``.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

An issue with the order of truncation/extension and casting of unsigned integer
indexes in ``numba.typed.List`` has been fixed.

(`PR-#7262 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7262>`__)

Prevent invalid fusion
""""""""""""""""""""""

This PR fixes an issue in which an array first read in a parfor and later
written in the same parfor would only be classified as used in the parfor.
When a subsequent parfor also used the same array then fusion of the
parfors was happening which should have been forbidden given that that the
first parfor was also writing to the array.  This PR treats such arrays
in a parfor as being both used and defined so that fusion will be prevented.

(`PR-#7582 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7582>`__)

The ``numpy.allclose`` implementation now correctly handles default arguments.
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The implementation of ``numpy.allclose`` is corrected to use ``TypingError`` to
report typing errors.

(`PR-#8885 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8885>`__)

Add type validation to ``numpy.isclose``.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Type validation is added to the implementation of ``numpy.isclose``.

(`PR-#8944 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8944>`__)

Fix support for overloading dispatcher with non-compatible first-class functions
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Fixes an error caused by not handling compilation error during casting of
``Dispatcher`` objects into first-class functions. With the fix, users can now
overload a dispatcher with non-compatible first-class functions. Refer to
https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/9071 for details.

(`PR-#9072 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9072>`__)

Support ``dtype`` keyword argument in ``numpy.arange`` with ``parallel=True``
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Fixes parfors transformation to support the use of ``dtype`` keyword argument in
``numpy.arange(..., dtype=dtype)``.

(`PR-#9095 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9095>`__)

Fix all ``@overload``\ s to use parameter names that match public APIs.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Some of the Numba ``@overload``\ s for functions in NumPy and Python's built-ins
were written using parameter names that did not match those used in API they
were overloading. The result of this being that calling a function with such a
mismatch using the parameter names as key-word arguments at the call site would
result in a compilation error. This has now been universally fixed throughout
the code base and a unit test is running with a best-effort attempt to prevent
reintroduction of similar mistakes in the future. Fixed functions include:

From Python built-ins:

* ``complex``

From the Python ``random`` module:

* ``random.seed``
* ``random.gauss``
* ``random.normalvariate``
* ``random.randrange``
* ``random.randint``
* ``random.uniform``
* ``random.shuffle``

From the ``numpy`` module:

* ``numpy.argmin``
* ``numpy.argmax``
* ``numpy.array_equal``
* ``numpy.average``
* ``numpy.count_nonzero``
* ``numpy.flip``
* ``numpy.fliplr``
* ``numpy.flipud``
* ``numpy.iinfo``
* ``numpy.isscalar``
* ``numpy.imag``
* ``numpy.real``
* ``numpy.reshape``
* ``numpy.rot90``
* ``numpy.swapaxes``
* ``numpy.union1d``
* ``numpy.unique``

From the ``numpy.linalg`` module:

* ``numpy.linalg.norm``
* ``numpy.linalg.cond``
* ``numpy.linalg.matrix_rank``

From the ``numpy.random`` module:

* ``numpy.random.beta``
* ``numpy.random.chisquare``
* ``numpy.random.f``
* ``numpy.random.gamma``
* ``numpy.random.hypergeometric``
* ``numpy.random.lognormal``
* ``numpy.random.pareto``
* ``numpy.random.randint``
* ``numpy.random.random_sample``
* ``numpy.random.ranf``
* ``numpy.random.rayleigh``
* ``numpy.random.sample``
* ``numpy.random.shuffle``
* ``numpy.random.standard_gamma``
* ``numpy.random.triangular``
* ``numpy.random.weibull``

(`PR-#9099 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9099>`__)


Changes
~~~~~~~


Support for ``@numba.extending.intrinsic(prefer_literal=True)``
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In the high level extension API, the ``prefer_literal`` option is added to the
``numba.extending.intrinsic`` decorator to prioritize the use of literal types
when available. This has the same behavior as in the ``prefer_literal``
option in the ``numba.extending.overload`` decorator.

(`PR-#6647 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/6647>`__)


Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Deprecation of old-style ``NUMBA_CAPTURED_ERRORS``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Added deprecation schedule of ``NUMBA_CAPTURED_ERRORS=old_style``.
``NUMBA_CAPTURED_ERRORS=new_style`` will become the default in future releases.
Details are documented at
https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/deprecation.html#deprecation-of-old-style-numba-captured-errors

(`PR-#9090 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9090>`__)

Pull-Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* PR `#6647 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/6647>`_: Support prefer_literal option for intrinsic decorator (`ashutoshvarma <https://github.com/ashutoshvarma>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#7262 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7262>`_: fix order of handling and casting (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#7543 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7543>`_: Support for all modes in np.correlate and np.convolve (`jeertmans <https://github.com/jeertmans>`_)
* PR `#7582 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/7582>`_: Use get_parfor_writes to detect illegal array access that prevents fusion. (`DrTodd13 <https://github.com/DrTodd13>`_)
* PR `#8371 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8371>`_: Added binomial distribution (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_ `kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_)
* PR `#8462 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8462>`_: Add PyBytes_AsString and PyBytes_AsStringAndSize (`ianna <https://github.com/ianna>`_)
* PR `#8633 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8633>`_: DOC: Convert vectorize and guvectorize examples to doctests (`Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_)
* PR `#8730 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8730>`_: Update dev-docs (`sgbaird <https://github.com/sgbaird>`_ `esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#8792 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8792>`_: Added towncrier as a github workflow (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_)
* PR `#8854 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8854>`_: Updated mk_alloc to support Numba-Dpex compute follows data. (`mingjie-intel <https://github.com/mingjie-intel>`_)
* PR `#8861 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8861>`_: CUDA: Don't add device kwarg for jit registry (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#8871 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8871>`_: Don't return the function in CallConv.decorate_function() (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#8885 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8885>`_: Fix np.allclose not handling default args (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#8892 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8892>`_: Add support for __*matmul__ methods in jitclass (`louisamand <https://github.com/louisamand>`_)
* PR `#8895 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8895>`_: CUDA: Enable caching functions that use CG (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#8906 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8906>`_: Add support for reflected dunder methods in jitclass (`louisamand <https://github.com/louisamand>`_)
* PR `#8911 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8911>`_: Remove isinstance experimental feature warning (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#8916 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8916>`_: Bump llvmlite requirement to 0.41.0dev0 (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#8925 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8925>`_: Update release checklist template (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#8937 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8937>`_: Remove old Website development documentation (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_ `gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#8944 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8944>`_: Add exceptions to np.isclose (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#8974 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8974>`_: CUDA: Add binary ufunc support (`Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_)
* PR `#8976 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8976>`_: Fix index URL for ptxcompiler/cubinlinker packages. (`bdice <https://github.com/bdice>`_)
* PR `#8978 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8978>`_: Import MVC packages when using MVCLinker. (`bdice <https://github.com/bdice>`_)
* PR `#8983 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8983>`_: Fix typo in deprecation.rst (`dsgibbons <https://github.com/dsgibbons>`_)
* PR `#8988 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8988>`_: support for latest CUDA driver codes #8363 (`s1Sharp <https://github.com/s1Sharp>`_)
* PR `#8995 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/8995>`_: Allow libraries that implement __array_ufunc__ to override DUFunc.__c… (`jpivarski <https://github.com/jpivarski>`_)
* PR `#9007 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9007>`_: CUDA: Add comparison ufunc support (`Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_)
* PR `#9012 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9012>`_: RVSDG-frontend (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9021 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9021>`_: update the release checklist following 0.57.1rc1 (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#9022 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9022>`_: fix: update the C++ ABI repo reference (`emmanuel-ferdman <https://github.com/emmanuel-ferdman>`_)
* PR `#9028 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9028>`_: Replace use of imp module removed in 3.12 (`hauntsaninja <https://github.com/hauntsaninja>`_)
* PR `#9034 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9034>`_: CUDA libs test: Report the absolute path of the loaded libcuda.so on Linux, + other improvements (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9035 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9035>`_: CUDA: Allow for debuginfo in nvdisasm output (`Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_)
* PR `#9037 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9037>`_: Recognize additional functions as being pure or not having side effects. (`DrTodd13 <https://github.com/DrTodd13>`_)
* PR `#9039 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9039>`_: Correct git clone link in installation instructions. (`ellifteria <https://github.com/ellifteria>`_)
* PR `#9040 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9040>`_: Remove NVVM 3.4 and CTK 11.0 / 11.1 support (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9046 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9046>`_: copy the change log changes for 0.57.1 to main (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#9050 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9050>`_: Update CODEOWNERS (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9051 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9051>`_: Add CUDA CFG support (`Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_)
* PR `#9056 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9056>`_: adding weekly meeting notes script (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#9068 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9068>`_: Adding np.geomspace (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9069 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9069>`_: Fix towncrier error due to importlib_resources upgrade (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9072 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9072>`_: Fix support for overloading dispatcher with non-compatible first-class functions (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9074 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9074>`_: Add np.trim_zeros (`sungraek <https://github.com/sungraek>`_ `guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#9082 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9082>`_: Add np.vsplit, np.hsplit, and np.dsplit (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9083 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9083>`_: Removed windows 32 references from code and documentation (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_)
* PR `#9085 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9085>`_: Add tests for np.row_stack (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9086 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9086>`_: Support NVRTC using ctypes binding (`testhound <https://github.com/testhound>`_ `gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9087 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9087>`_: Add trimseq from np.polynomial.polyutils and polyadd, polysub, polymul from np.polynomial.polynomial (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9088 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9088>`_: Fix: Issue 9063 - CUDA atomics tests failing with CUDA 12.2 (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9090 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9090>`_: Add deprecation notice for old_style error capturing. (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9094 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9094>`_: Add support for a 'max' level to NUMBA_OPT environment variable. (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_)
* PR `#9095 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9095>`_: Support dtype keyword in arange_parallel_impl (`DrTodd13 <https://github.com/DrTodd13>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9105 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9105>`_: NumPy 1.25 support (PR #9011) continued (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_ `apmasell <https://github.com/apmasell>`_)
* PR `#9111 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9111>`_: Fixes ReST syntax error in PR#9099 (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_ `gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_ `apmasell <https://github.com/apmasell>`_)
* PR `#9112 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9112>`_: Fixups for PR#9100 (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9113 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9113>`_: Add support for np.diagflat (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9114 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9114>`_: update np min to 122 (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_ `esc <https://github.com/esc>`_)
* PR `#9117 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9117>`_: Fixed towncrier template rendering (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_)
* PR `#9118 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9118>`_: Add support for np.resize() (`KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_)
* PR `#9120 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9120>`_: Update conda-recipe for numba-rvsdg (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9127 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9127>`_: Fix accidental cffi test deps, refactor cffi skipping (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9128 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9128>`_: Merge rvsdg_frontend branch to main (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9152 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9152>`_: Fix old_style error capturing deprecation warnings (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9159 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9159>`_: Fix uncaught exception in find_file() (`gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_)
* PR `#9173 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9173>`_: Towncrier fixups (Continue #9158 and retarget to main branch) (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9181 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9181>`_: Remove extra decrefs in RNG (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#9190 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9190>`_: Fix issue with incompatible multiprocessing context in test. (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_)

Authors
~~~~~~~

* `apmasell <https://github.com/apmasell>`_
* `ashutoshvarma <https://github.com/ashutoshvarma>`_
* `bdice <https://github.com/bdice>`_
* `DrTodd13 <https://github.com/DrTodd13>`_
* `dsgibbons <https://github.com/dsgibbons>`_
* `ellifteria <https://github.com/ellifteria>`_
* `emmanuel-ferdman <https://github.com/emmanuel-ferdman>`_
* `esc <https://github.com/esc>`_
* `gmarkall <https://github.com/gmarkall>`_
* `guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_
* `hauntsaninja <https://github.com/hauntsaninja>`_
* `ianna <https://github.com/ianna>`_
* `jeertmans <https://github.com/jeertmans>`_
* `jpivarski <https://github.com/jpivarski>`_
* `jtilly <https://github.com/jtilly>`_
* `kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_
* `KrisMinchev <https://github.com/KrisMinchev>`_
* `louisamand <https://github.com/louisamand>`_
* `Matt711 <https://github.com/Matt711>`_
* `mingjie-intel <https://github.com/mingjie-intel>`_
* `s1Sharp <https://github.com/s1Sharp>`_
* `sgbaird <https://github.com/sgbaird>`_
* `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_
* `stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_
* `sungraek <https://github.com/sungraek>`_
* `testhound <https://github.com/testhound>`_
