
Version 0.61.1rc1 (24 March 2025)
=================================

This is a maintenance release that adds support for NumPy 2.2 and fixes few bugs.

Highlights
~~~~~~~~~~

Support for NumPy 2.2
---------------------

Numba now supports NumPy 2.2, with the following notable changes:

- ``np.empty(0)`` cannot be treated as a boolean value anymore. This is a
  breaking change for code that relies on this behavior. The following code
  will raise a ``ValueError``:

  .. code-block:: python

      import numpy as np
      if np.empty(0):
          print("This will not be printed")

- Generic timedeltas can no longer be hashed due to undefined time units.

- From NumPy 2.2 onwards, hash values for ``numpy.timedelta64`` and
  ``numpy.datetime64`` instances computed in Numba compiled code do not match
  the NumPy hash values of the same. Prior to NumPy 2.2, NumPy hash values for
  ``numpy.timedelta64`` and ``numpy.datetime64`` instances were equivalent to
  their integer value representation. From NumPy 2.2 onwards, their hash value
  is the same as the hash of the equivalent type from the built-in ``datetime``
  module, Numba does not replicate this behaviour.

- ``np.trimzeros`` now also trims ``\0`` values.

(`PR-#9919 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9919>`__)


Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~

Fix static type checker support for ``numba.core.types``
--------------------------------------------------------

When Numba 0.61 introduced the split type system, it resulted in dynamic type 
behavior that was incompatible with static type checkers. To resolve this,
we've added a type stub file (``.pyi``) for ``numba.core.types`` that provides
explicit type annotations.

(`PR-#9945 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9945>`__)

Fix issue in code generation for array set-slice.
-------------------------------------------------

The code generation for array set-slice was inadvertently written as being CPU
target specific. This is now rectified and refactored so as to provide a
"generic" target version that should be safe to use everywhere, along with an
``@overload``-able stub to allow targets to implement custom versions as needed.

(`PR-#9972 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/9972>`__)
