
Version 0.67.0 (TBD)
====================

This is a major Numba release. Numba now adds support for NumPy 2.5.
This release also ships Python 3.14 conda packages and wheels for
Windows ARM64. It also adds JIT-compilation support for ``np.insert``
and a dynamic ``axis`` argument for the ``np.sum`` and ``np.cumsum``
reduction functions.

Please find a summary of all noteworthy items below.

Highlights
~~~~~~~~~~

Support for NumPy 2.5
---------------------

Numba now supports NumPy 2.5, with the following notable changes:

- ``np.linalg.eig`` and ``np.linalg.eigvals`` now return complex
  eigenvalues/eigenvectors for real input, matching NumPy 2.5. Previously,
  real input produced real results and raised an error if the eigenvalues
  turned out to be complex.

- ``np.sign`` on ``timedelta64`` values now returns ``float64`` (with
  ``NaT`` mapping to ``nan``), matching NumPy 2.5.

- ``np.row_stack`` has been removed in NumPy 2.5. Use ``np.vstack``
  instead.

- The two-dimensional cross product has been removed in NumPy 2.5, so the
  ``numba.np.extensions.cross2d`` helper is only available with
  NumPy < 2.5.

(`PR-#10645 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10645>`__)


Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``np.sum`` now supports dynamic ``axis`` argument.
--------------------------------------------------

The ``np.sum`` function now supports a dynamic ``axis`` argument,
allowing users to specify the axis along which to perform the
operation at runtime. The limitation of only supporting a static
axis up to ``axis=3`` has also been removed.

(`PR-#10625 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10625>`__)

``np.cumsum`` now supports dynamic ``axis`` argument.
-----------------------------------------------------

The ``np.cumsum`` function now supports a dynamic ``axis`` argument,
allowing users to specify the axis along which to perform the
operation at runtime.

(`PR-#10657 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10657>`__)

Speed up legacy binomial sampling and align BTPE with NumPy 2.5
---------------------------------------------------------------

``np.random.binomial`` (RandomState) now uses NumPy's BTPE algorithm for large
means (``n * min(p, 1 - p) > 30``) instead of BINV, substantially speeding up
sampling for large ``n`` or mid-range probabilities while preserving the
RandomState stream. The BTPE rejection squeeze shared by the RandomState and
``Generator`` paths is also corrected: ``Generator.binomial`` now tracks NumPy
2.5's fixed squeeze (https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/31238) when running
against ``numpy >= 2.5``, matching NumPy's output, and is left unchanged under
older NumPy. The legacy ``np.random.binomial`` stream is unchanged.

(`PR-#10694 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10694>`__)


NumPy Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Added ``ddof`` argument to ``np.nanvar`` and ``np.nanstd``
----------------------------------------------------------

The ``ddof`` (Delta Degrees of Freedom) argument is now supported in
``np.nanvar`` and ``np.nanstd`` in nopython mode, matching NumPy behaviour.
Default ``ddof=0`` preserves backward compatibility.

(`PR-#10540 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10540>`__)

Added support for ``np.insert``
-------------------------------

``numpy.insert`` is now supported in nopython mode. The ``arr``, ``obj`` and
``values`` arguments are supported, where ``obj`` may be an integer or a
sequence/array of integers. As with ``numpy.delete``, the insertion is
performed on the flattened input array (the ``axis`` argument is not yet
supported).

(`PR-#10660 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10660>`__)


Performance Improvements and Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use topological iteration order in liveness fix-point analysis
--------------------------------------------------------------

Previously, ``compute_live_map`` and ``compute_live_variables`` iterated over
basic blocks in dict-insertion order during their fix-point loops, which could
require a number of iterations proportional to the loop-nesting depth (or to how
far block order had drifted from topological order after inlining/merging) to
converge. Both fix-points now iterate in topological order (and reverse
topological order for the backward liveness pass), which converges in a small
constant number of iterations regardless of graph size. This is a
behavior-preserving change that reduces compilation time, most noticeably on
large generated or unrolled functions with many basic blocks.

(`PR-#10616 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10616>`__)

Use set for on_stack membership test in back-edge detection
-----------------------------------------------------------

Previously, ``_find_back_edges`` tested ``cur_node in stack`` where ``stack``
is a list, making each membership check O(n). The DFS now maintains a parallel
``on_stack`` set for O(1) lookups, improving back-edge detection performance.

(`PR-#10618 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10618>`__)


Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~

Fix ``omp_set_nested`` deprecation warning in the OpenMP threading layer
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Numba's OpenMP threading layer called the deprecated ``omp_set_nested``
routine when initializing its thread pool. On OpenMP 5.0+ runtimes (for
example the Intel/LLVM ``libomp`` shipped with MKL), this caused the message
``OMP: Info #273: omp_set_nested routine deprecated, please use
omp_set_max_active_levels instead.`` to be emitted when running a parallel
function with ``NUMBA_THREADING_LAYER=omp``. The threading layer now probes
for ``omp_set_max_active_levels`` in the loaded OpenMP runtime and uses it
when present, falling back to ``omp_set_nested`` only when the newer routine
is unavailable (`#5275 <https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/5275>`_).

(`PR-#10612 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10612>`__)

Make ``pycc`` AOT-compiled extensions reproducible
--------------------------------------------------

Extension modules produced by ``numba.pycc`` are now byte-for-byte
identical across independent builds of the same source on Linux and MacOS.
Previously, several mangled LLVM symbol names and global names
embedded process-specific values (``id(obj)``, the default ``object.__repr__``
of ``CPUContext``), so two builds of the same module produced AOT binaries with
different MD5 hashes.

(`PR-#10615 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10615>`__)

Fix silent miscompile when reassigning a nonlocal in an inner function
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Assigning a ``nonlocal`` variable more than once inside an inner function
dropped every write after the first without error. Numba now raises an
``UnsupportedError`` at compile time instead of miscompiling.

(`PR-#10637 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10637>`__)

Sort ``numba.cext`` C sources for reproducible AOT builds
---------------------------------------------------------

``numba.pycc`` collected its C mixin sources via ``os.listdir``, whose
order is filesystem-defined and varies across hosts. This made the source
(and hence symbol) order of AOT-compiled binaries non-deterministic across
build machines. The sources are now sorted so independent builds produce
byte-for-byte identical binaries.

(`PR-#10666 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10666>`__)

Make ``pycc`` AOT-compiled extensions reproducible on macOS with debug builds
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extension modules produced by ``numba.pycc`` on macOS are now byte-for-byte
identical across independent builds even when the interpreter's ``sysconfig``
compiles extensions with debug information (``-g``). Previously, the macOS
linker embedded an ``N_OSO`` debug-map entry per object file holding the
object's absolute path inside a randomly-named temporary build directory
(and its modification time), so two builds of the same module produced AOT
binaries with different hashes. The macOS link step now passes ``-Wl,-S`` to
strip the debug map while preserving the symbols required at runtime.

(`PR-#10669 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10669>`__)

Fix a miscompile in ``pointer_add``
-----------------------------------

``pointer_add`` built the offset pointer through a ``ptrtoint``/``inttoptr``
round-trip, producing a pointer with no provenance that LLVM could miscompile
once inlined, returning invalid results or raising spurious exceptions.
It now uses a byte-wise ``getelementptr`` instead, which preserves provenance.
Fixed spurious errors during element access on non-contiguous (``'A'`` layout) arrays.

(`PR-#10696 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10696>`__)

Fix loss of ``@intrinsic`` lowering across compilation targets
--------------------------------------------------------------

An intrinsic typed on a second target (for example CUDA after the CPU)
replaced the shared implementation cache entry with a closure whose lowering
was registered only on that target, so a later compilation on the first
target failed with ``NotImplementedError: No definition for lowering``. The
implementation cache is now keyed by the typing context as well as the
argument types.

(`PR-#10699 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10699>`__)

Fix Dynamic Raise Exception Message Handling
--------------------------------------------

Raising a dynamic exception with a literal message stored in a variable could cause the compiled code to display a different literal value.
Numba now handles dynamic exception message variables self-consistently, and prevents message collisions between variables with the same underlying storage representation.

(`PR-#10702 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10702>`__)

Fix internal ``KeyError`` in ``literal_unroll`` when a variable name is reused
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Iterating with ``literal_unroll`` failed with an internal ``KeyError`` when a
variable indexed in the loop body had its name reused elsewhere in the
function. Numba now raises an ``UnsupportedError`` naming the variable.

(`PR-#10710 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10710>`__)


Documentation Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add Windows on ARM64 to support policy Tier 1.5
-----------------------------------------------

The :ref:`Support Tiers <support_tiers>` documentation now lists ``win-arm64``
(Windows on 64-bit ARM) as a Tier 1.5 release configuration.  Wheel and conda
packages are initially provided for Python 3.14 only; support for additional
Python versions may be added in the future.

(`PR-#10569 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10569>`__)

Add AI tool use policy.
-----------------------

The Numba org now has an AI tool use policy:
https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/ai_tools_policy.html

(`PR-#10713 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10713>`__)


Infrastructure Related Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add Windows on ARM64 CI and build support
-----------------------------------------

Added GitHub Actions workflows to build and test Numba conda packages and
wheels on ``win-arm64`` runners. The conda recipe now supports ARM64
Windows builds with VS2022. Several tests that trigger an LLVM 22
AArch64 frame lowering assertion on ``win-arm64`` are skipped pending
fix (`llvm/llvm-project#204060 <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/204060>`_).

(`PR-#10644 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10644>`__)

Re-enable win-arm64 tests after LLVM FrameLowering fix
------------------------------------------------------

Several tests that were temporarily skipped on ``win-arm64`` due to an LLVM 22
AArch64 frame lowering assertion when JIT-compiling functions with 40 or more
arguments are now run again. The ``win-arm64`` CI workflows use a patched
LLVM build that includes the upstream fix (`llvm/llvm-project#204347
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/204347>`_;
`numba/llvmlite#1439 <https://github.com/numba/llvmlite/pull/1439>`_).

(`PR-#10664 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10664>`__)

Pull-Requests:

* PR `#10465 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10465>`_: Revert "Merge pull request #10462 from swap357/fix/pin_conda_version_ci" (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10540 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10540>`_: Add ddof argument to np.nanvar and np.nanstd (fixes #6611) (`furperson <https://github.com/furperson>`_)
* PR `#10553 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10553>`_: `numba.core.errors` type stubs (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10555 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10555>`_: `numba.core.types.scalars` type stubs (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10557 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10557>`_: `numba.core.types.common` type stubs (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10569 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10569>`_: Tier 1.5 support for Windows ARM64 (`seibert <https://github.com/seibert>`_)
* PR `#10572 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10572>`_: Fix: NumPy 1.24 test failures  (`esc <https://github.com/esc>`_ `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10576 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10576>`_: Type-checking with Pyrefly (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10598 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10598>`_: `numba.np.numpy_support` type stubs (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10601 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10601>`_: Update dependency mypy to >=2, <2.2 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10612 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10612>`_: Fix "omp_set_nested" deprecation warning (`psavery <https://github.com/psavery>`_)
* PR `#10615 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10615>`_: Make pycc AOT binaries reproducible (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#10616 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10616>`_: Use topological iteration order in liveness fix-point analysis (`sebastianbreguel <https://github.com/sebastianbreguel>`_)
* PR `#10618 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10618>`_: Use set for on_stack membership test in _find_back_edges (`sebastianbreguel <https://github.com/sebastianbreguel>`_)
* PR `#10625 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10625>`_: Support dynamic axis in NumPy operations using experimental ArrayIterator class (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_)
* PR `#10637 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10637>`_: Fix silent miscompile when reassigning a nonlocal in a closure (`eyupcanakman <https://github.com/eyupcanakman>`_)
* PR `#10639 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10639>`_: update llvmlite version on numba to `0.49.0dev0` (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10644 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10644>`_: `win-arm64` support for Numba (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10645 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10645>`_: Add NumPy 2.5 support for Numba (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_ `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10654 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10654>`_: Cherry pick 0.66.0rc2 (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_ `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10655 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10655>`_: update release date for 0.66.0rc2 (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10657 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10657>`_: Add cumulative sum ArrayIterator implementation (`kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_ `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#10658 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10658>`_: Update actions/checkout action to v7 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10660 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10660>`_: Add support for np.insert (`nitnx <https://github.com/nitnx>`_)
* PR `#10664 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10664>`_: Revert skipping tests on `win-arm64` 40args problem (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10666 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10666>`_: Sort cext libs for deterministic AOT builds (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#10669 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10669>`_: Strip macOS debug map in pycc to make AOT binaries reproducible (`guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_)
* PR `#10674 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10674>`_: update release notes and version support table 0.66 (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10690 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10690>`_: Fix sphinx docutils CI error (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#10691 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10691>`_: Bump setuptools version (`GongJr0 <https://github.com/GongJr0>`_)
* PR `#10694 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10694>`_: Use BTPE for large legacy binomial draws and align the Generator BTPE squeeze with NumPy 2.5 (`sebastianbreguel <https://github.com/sebastianbreguel>`_ `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10696 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10696>`_: Use gep in `pointer_add` (`ricardoV94 <https://github.com/ricardoV94>`_)
* PR `#10697 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10697>`_: Update actions/stale action to v10.4.0 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10699 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10699>`_: Fix cross-target loss of @intrinsic lowering (`RayanDhib <https://github.com/RayanDhib>`_)
* PR `#10700 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10700>`_: Cherry pick 0.66 (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_ `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10702 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10702>`_: Dynamic raise collapse (`mcdigman <https://github.com/mcdigman>`_)
* PR `#10704 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10704>`_: Fix #6270. Fix `is_serializable()` (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#10706 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10706>`_: Typo fix: serialiable->serializable (`sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_)
* PR `#10707 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10707>`_: Bump `mypy` to `>=2.3, <2.4` (`jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_)
* PR `#10709 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10709>`_: Fix incorrect handling of jitclass kwonly arguments (`kiilerix <https://github.com/kiilerix>`_)
* PR `#10710 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10710>`_: Fix literal_unroll KeyError when a variable name is reused (`eyupcanakman <https://github.com/eyupcanakman>`_)
* PR `#10711 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10711>`_: Update pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish digest to ba38be9 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10712 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10712>`_: Update actions/setup-python action to v7 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10713 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10713>`_: Add AI tool use policy. (`stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_)
* PR `#10714 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10714>`_: Update actions/checkout action to v7.0.1 (`renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_)
* PR `#10722 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10722>`_: add win-arm64 workflows to upload config (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)
* PR `#10724 <https://github.com/numba/numba/pull/10724>`_: Changelog `0.67` (`swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_)

Authors:

* `esc <https://github.com/esc>`_
* `eyupcanakman <https://github.com/eyupcanakman>`_
* `furperson <https://github.com/furperson>`_
* `GongJr0 <https://github.com/GongJr0>`_
* `guilhermeleobas <https://github.com/guilhermeleobas>`_
* `jorenham <https://github.com/jorenham>`_
* `kc611 <https://github.com/kc611>`_
* `kiilerix <https://github.com/kiilerix>`_
* `mcdigman <https://github.com/mcdigman>`_
* `nitnx <https://github.com/nitnx>`_
* `psavery <https://github.com/psavery>`_
* `RayanDhib <https://github.com/RayanDhib>`_
* `renovate[bot] <https://github.com/apps/renovate>`_
* `ricardoV94 <https://github.com/ricardoV94>`_
* `sebastianbreguel <https://github.com/sebastianbreguel>`_
* `seibert <https://github.com/seibert>`_
* `sklam <https://github.com/sklam>`_
* `stuartarchibald <https://github.com/stuartarchibald>`_
* `swap357 <https://github.com/swap357>`_
